salt: Use csc framework for UI configuration (#3181)
scality/metalk8s: docs/operation/cluster_and_service_configuration.rst

   :language: yaml
   :lines: 3-

UI Default Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Metalk8s UI simplifies metalk8s cluster management and monitoring in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MetalK8s UI simplifies management and monitoring of a MetalK8s cluster from a
```

centralized user interface.

> The default configuration values for Metalk8s UI are specified below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default configuration values for MetalK8s UI are specified below:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../salt/metalk8s/addons/ui/config/metalk8s-ui-config.yaml
   :language: yaml
   :lines: 3-

See :ref:`csc-ui-customization` to override these defaults.

UI Default Theme
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Metalk8s allows to overrides theme color to enable customisation of the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can override theme colors used by MetalK8s UI.
```

> The default theme for Metalk8s UI are specified below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default theme for MetalK8s UI are specified below:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../shell-ui/theme.json
   :language: json
   :lines: 3-

See :ref:`csc-ui-theme-customization` to override these defaults.

Shell UI Default Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

MetalK8s shell UI provides a set of features available to Metalk8s UI and
solutions UIs.

> It includes authentication through OIDC and menu items management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MetalK8s Shell UI provides a common set of features to MetalK8s UI and
any other UI (both control and workload plane) configured to include the
Shell UI component(s).
Features exposed include:
- user authentication using an OIDC provider
- navigation menu items, displayed according to user groups (retrieved from OIDC)
```

The default Shell UI configuration values are specified below:

.. literalinclude:: ../../salt/metalk8s/addons/ui/config/metalk8s-shell-ui-config.yaml.j2
   :language: yaml
   :lines: 3-

See :ref:`csc-shell-ui-config-customization` to override these defaults.

> 

Reviewer: Since we start documenting configuration of the "Shell UI", it'd make sense to introduce it to the user with more context (what's its role/purpose, how is it deployed, ...). To do in another ticket/PR I guess (the need to re-configure MetalK8s for using another OIDC provider has already been raised by the community, see https://github.com/scality/metalk8s/discussions/3097).

Author: I've opened #3207 to track this

   Due to internal implementation, ``retention_period`` must be a multiple of
   ``24h`` in order to get the expected behavior

.. _csc-ui-customization:

Metalk8s UI Configuration Customization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Default configuration for MetalK8s UI can be overridden by editing its
Cluster and Service ConfigMap ``metalk8s-ui-config`` in namespace
``metalk8s-ui`` under the key ``data.config\.yaml``:

  .. code-block:: shell

     root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                        edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                        metalk8s-ui-config

> Changing the path on which Metalk8s UI is served

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing the MetalK8s UI Ingress Path
```

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Sometimes you may want to expose others UIs than MetalK8s UI at the
root path of the control plane and in order to do so you need to

> customise the path on which Metalk8s UI is deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to expose another UI at the root path of the control plane,
in place of MetalK8s UI, you need to change the Ingress path from
which MetalK8s UI is served.
```

For example, to expose MetalK8s UI on /platform instead of / the

> ConfigMap must be edited as follows :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to serve MetalK8s UI at **/platform** instead of **/**, follow
these steps:

#. Change the value of ``spec.basePath`` in the ConfigMap:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    data:
      config.yaml: |-
        apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com
        kind: Metalk8sUIConfig
        spec:
          uiBasePath: /platform

> You would then need to apply your changes by running :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Apply your changes by running:
```

.. parsed-literal::

      root\@bootstrap $ kubectl exec -n kube-system -c salt-master \\
                         --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \\
                         salt-master-bootstrap -- salt-run state.sls \\
                         metalk8s.addons.ui.deployed saltenv=metalk8s-|version|

.. _csc-ui-theme-customization:

> Metalk8s UI Theme Configuration Customization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MetalK8s UI Theme Customization
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Default configuration for MetalK8s UI Theme can be overridden by editing its
Cluster and Service ConfigMap ``metalk8s-theme`` in namespace
``metalk8s-ui`` under the key ``data.config\.yaml``:

  .. code-block:: shell

     root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                        edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                        metalk8s-theme

> Once the theme edited, you would need to apply your changes by running :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the theme is edited, apply your changes by running:
```

.. parsed-literal::

      root\@bootstrap $ kubectl exec -n kube-system -c salt-master \\
                         --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \\
                         salt-master-bootstrap -- salt-run state.sls \\
                         metalk8s.addons.ui.deployed saltenv=metalk8s-|version|

.. _csc-shell-ui-config-customization:

> Metalk8s Shell UI Configuration Customization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MetalK8s Shell UI Configuration Customization
```

(those titles... :vomiting_face: can't wait for #2739!)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Default configuration for MetalK8s Shell UI can be overridden by editing its
Cluster and Service ConfigMap ``metalk8s-shell-ui-config`` in namespace
``metalk8s-ui`` under the key ``data.config\.yaml``:

  .. code-block:: shell

    root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                        edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \

>                         metalk8s-shell-ui-config

Reviewer: Since we repeat this command in each section below, let's remove it from here:

```suggestion
``metalk8s-ui`` under the key ``data.config\.yaml``.
```

> Changing UI OIDC configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing UI OIDC Configuration
```

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Sometimes you may want to adapt client id or scopes used to retrieve an OIDC
token in the UI.
In order to do this UI OIDC Configuration can be changed by modifying Shell

> UI configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to adapt the OIDC configuration (e.g. the provider URL or the client ID)
used by the UI shareable navigation bar (called Shell UI), you need to modify
its ConfigMap.
```

For example, in order to define "ui" as a the new client id instead of

> metalk8s-ui by default you have to follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in order to replace the default client ID with "ui",
follow these steps:
```

> #. Edit the configmap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Edit the ConfigMap:
```

.. code-block:: shell

    root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                    edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                    metalk8s-shell-ui-config

> #. Add the following entry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Add the following entry:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    data:
      config.yaml: |-
        apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com
        kind: Metalk8sShellUIConfig
        spec:
          # [...]
          oidc:
            # [...]
            clientId: "ui"

> #. Apply your changes by running :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Apply your changes by running:
```

.. parsed-literal::

      root\@bootstrap $ kubectl exec -n kube-system -c salt-master \\
                         --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \\
                         salt-master-bootstrap -- salt-run state.sls \\
                         metalk8s.addons.ui.deployed saltenv=metalk8s-|version|

You can similarly edit the requested scopes through the "scopes" attribute or

> the OIDC provider url through the "providerUrl" attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the OIDC provider URL through the "providerUrl" attribute.
```

> Changing UI menu entries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing UI Menu Entries
```

""""""""""""""""""""""""

> You can edit UI menu entries by following these steps :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change the UI navigation menu entries, follow these steps:
```

> #. Edit the configmap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Edit the ConfigMap:
```

.. code-block:: shell

    root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                    edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                    metalk8s-shell-ui-config

#. Edit the options entry, for example here we add a Scality entry

> in the main menu pointing to scality website :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Edit the ``options`` field. As an example, we add an entry to
   the ``main`` section (there is also a ``subLogin`` section):
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    data:
      config.yaml: |-
        apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com
        kind: Metalk8sShellUIConfig
        spec:
          # [...]
          options:
            # [...]
            main:
              # [...]
              https://www.scality.com/:
                en: "Scality"
                fr: "Scality"

> #. Apply your changes by running :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Apply your changes by running:
```

   Due to internal implementation, ``retention_period`` must be a multiple of
   ``24h`` in order to get the expected behavior

.. _csc-ui-customization:

Metalk8s UI Configuration Customization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Default configuration for MetalK8s UI can be overridden by editing its
Cluster and Service ConfigMap ``metalk8s-ui-config`` in namespace
``metalk8s-ui`` under the key ``data.config\.yaml``:

  .. code-block:: shell

     root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                        edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                        metalk8s-ui-config

> Changing the MetalK8s UI Ingress Path
> """"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Reviewer: It's not "critical" but still a bit ugly :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye:

```suggestion
Changing the MetalK8s UI Ingress Path
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

Author: I took care of it in https://github.com/scality/metalk8s/pull/3196

In order to expose another UI at the root path of the control plane,
in place of MetalK8s UI, you need to change the Ingress path from
which MetalK8s UI is served.

For example, to serve MetalK8s UI at **/platform** instead of **/**, follow
these steps:

#. Change the value of ``spec.basePath`` in the ConfigMap:

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    data:
      config.yaml: |-

>         apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com/v1alpha1
```

>         kind: Metalk8sUIConfig

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        kind: UIConfig
```

        spec:
          basePath: /platform

#. Apply your changes by running:

.. parsed-literal::

      root\@bootstrap $ kubectl exec -n kube-system -c salt-master \\
                         --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \\
                         salt-master-bootstrap -- salt-run state.sls \\
                         metalk8s.addons.ui.deployed saltenv=metalk8s-|version|

.. _csc-ui-theme-customization:

> MetalK8s UI Theme Customization
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MetalK8s UI Theme Customization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Default configuration for MetalK8s UI Theme can be overridden by editing its
Cluster and Service ConfigMap ``metalk8s-theme`` in namespace
``metalk8s-ui`` under the key ``data.config\.yaml``:

  .. code-block:: shell

     root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                        edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                        metalk8s-theme

Once the theme is edited, apply your changes by running:

> 

Reviewer: Extra empty line, to remove

                         salt-master-bootstrap -- salt-run state.sls \\
                         metalk8s.addons.ui.deployed saltenv=metalk8s-|version|

.. _csc-shell-ui-config-customization:

MetalK8s Shell UI Configuration Customization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Default configuration for MetalK8s Shell UI can be overridden by editing its
Cluster and Service ConfigMap ``metalk8s-shell-ui-config`` in namespace
``metalk8s-ui`` under the key ``data.config\.yaml``.

Changing UI OIDC Configuration
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

In order to adapt the OIDC configuration (e.g. the provider URL or
the client ID) used by the UI shareable navigation bar (called Shell UI),
you need to modify its ConfigMap.

For example, in order to replace the default client ID with "ui",
follow these steps:

#. Edit the ConfigMap:

.. code-block:: shell

    root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                    edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                    metalk8s-shell-ui-config

#. Add the following entry:

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    data:
      config.yaml: |-

>         apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com/v1alpha1
```

>         kind: Metalk8sShellUIConfig

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        kind: ShellUIConfig
```

        spec:
          # [...]
          oidc:
            # [...]
            clientId: "ui"

#. Apply your changes by running:

.. parsed-literal::

      root\@bootstrap $ kubectl exec -n kube-system -c salt-master \\
                         --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \\
                         salt-master-bootstrap -- salt-run state.sls \\
                         metalk8s.addons.ui.deployed saltenv=metalk8s-|version|

You can similarly edit the requested scopes through the "scopes" attribute or
the OIDC provider URL through the "providerUrl" attribute.

Changing UI Menu Entries
""""""""""""""""""""""""

To change the UI navigation menu entries, follow these steps:

#. Edit the ConfigMap:

.. code-block:: shell

    root@bootstrap $ kubectl --kubeconfig /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf \
                    edit configmap -n metalk8s-ui \
                    metalk8s-shell-ui-config

#. Edit the ``options`` field. As an example, we add an entry to
   the ``main`` section (there is also a ``subLogin`` section):

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    data:
      config.yaml: |-

>         apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        apiVersion: addons.metalk8s.scality.com/v1alpha1
```

>         kind: Metalk8sShellUIConfig

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        kind: ShellUIConfig
```
